---
layout: post
title: Kinda-Curried Type Parameters
tags: scala
---

*This started off as a gist+tweet but got sufficient attention to warrant immortalization as a blog post. Thanks @milessabin, @S11001001 and others for confirming that it's legit.*

Scala methods can have multiple lists of **value** parameters but only one list of **type** parameters, which is occasionally irritating when some are inferable and others are not. Consider this method which has two type parameters, one inferable and one not.

```scala
import scalaz._, Scalaz._

def wrap[F[_]: Applicative, A](a: A): F[A] =
  Applicative[F].point(a)
```

It works fine, but you must supply both type arguments even though the second is inferable.

```scala
scala> wrap[List,Int](1) // ugh
res0: List[Int] = List(1)

scala> wrap(1) : List[Int] // nope
<console>:15: error: ambiguous implicit values:
 [one thousand lines of uesless information]
```

What we really want is to be able to say `wrap[Option](3)`. But how do we write it?

The trick is to use an unconstrained no-arg method to bind the first (non-inferrable) type argument, constructing an instance of a class with a polymorphic `apply` method to bind the second (inferrable) type argument. Note that the typeclass constraint is pushed down to the second application. If there were no such constraint then a `scalaz.Forall` could replace `WrapHelper`.

```scala
final class WrapHelper[F[_]] {
  def apply[A](a: A)(implicit ev: Applicative[F]): F[A] =
    ev.point(a)
}

def wrap[F[_]] = new WrapHelper[F]
```

Which works as desired.

```scala
scala> wrap[List](1) // yay!
res1: List[Int] = List(1)

scala> wrap[Option](1)
res2: Option[Int] = Some(1)
```

This can also be done with a structural type, which is syntactically simpler but requires reflective access (which is not recommended ... it can be slow and can cause problems with some bytecode manipulation tools).

```scala
import scala.language.reflectiveCalls

def wrap[F[_]] = new {
  def apply[A](a: A)(implicit ev: Applicative[F]): F[A] =
    ev.point(a)
}
```

This trick appears here and there in Scala libraries that take use fancy types, including shapeless and scalaz (and Play iteratees, I am told).
